This is the morning of November the 6th.
I am in the lovely home of
Professor Emeritus C.A. Bonnen, who is a member of
the Department of Agricultural Economics at
Texas A&M University, although he has been
retired for many years. He retired, he says, in
1961,
but we are most anxious to get his
response to some important questions, to
capitalize on his rich experience. So CA, what I'd
like to do is just ask you to respond to a few
questions, and you just Give us your
recollections of these things. You grew up on a
farm in central Illinois. Born, you said, in 1896,
so this was the turn of the century and the first
decade into this new century. What was farm life
like then? Well, it was pretty hard work. Tractors
were just coming in. They weren't in general use.
Of course, there were still a majority of the farm
power. And
that's the
most I recall of it. I left the
farm right after I graduated from the university.
anything I'd say about corn at that time, which was
1920.
Did you harvest the corn by hand picking then?
Yeah. Entirely, wasn't it? Did they have the wheel
plow? Did you have a wheel plow or was it a hand plow?
Do you recall? Did the plows have wheels? Yes. And
you rode on them or were they hand plows? They had
wheel plows. So you did have some relatively
modern technology, didn't you? Yeah, such as it
was. Did you have livestock besides the horses? Oh
yes. Did you feed cattle or did you have hogs
mostly? We had dairy cattle.
So you think there's been a lot of changes in that
farm in Illinois, hasn't there, C.A.? I imagine
there has. Yeah. When did you last get back to
Illinois to see the farming? Oh,
right after I graduated from the university and
that was 1920. I see. Well, the size of the farms are
much, much larger.
My family moved off the farm and moved to Urbana at
that time.
Well, what contributions do you believe that
agricultural
research As you've experienced it over the years,
not just economics, but the whole agricultural
research, what contributions has that made to
farming in Illinois and Texas? Within what
period? Since you were on that farm.
That's right up until now. Right up until now. I
haven't been back there to see what they've done.
I'm sure it's changed a lot. Farms are larger, more
power to use, all that sort of thing. I'm worried
about changes.
During those earlier years of your professional
life, you were heavily involved in farm
management research. and you were able to see some
of the changes that were occurring in the way those
farms were managed and operated. I'd really like
to get your recollections of those kinds of
changes. Well, of course there's been a lot of
changes, especially in the older farming areas.
The big change has been in the areas like East
Texas, where we've practically gone out of
farming. I don't plan to change ownership.
Ownership is in the hands of people that used to
live in Houston and places like that. Very little
farming done. It's mostly forestry. sort of
thing. In the other areas of
Texas where farming is still going on, in the
rolling plains, in the black lands, you've seen
less dramatic changes in the sense that
agriculture, the farming hasn't gone out of the
areas, but What kind of changes did you see taking
place while you were involved in research?
Well, I recall that there was more irrigation on
the plains and wherever they could get water.
And of course,
the types of farming further west you go, the tax of
farming are pretty much the same.
All it has changed is the power and that sort of
thing.
Do you feel that our profession of agricultural
economics, and particularly in farm management,
made some real contributions to agriculture in
those years?
It's pretty hard to say.
Changes have taken place regardless, you know. I
imagine we had some influence on me.
As you look back, and this may not be a fair question
to ask anybody, but
you've had a chance to reflect on the profession
and what you were doing. Do you see any areas where
you think we missed the boat? Some things we ought
to have done as agricultural economists and in
farm management that we didn't do or things that we
did incorrectly, inadequately? That's some
question.
I suppose there were some things that we should
have done that we didn't do, but that would have
been true of any group that existed at that time.
We're all subject to change. Yes. How
much change we would have made if we had known more
than we did is a question even today. I think all
these changes would have taken place whether we
were here or not. Yes, they might have taken place
differently had they not had access to our your
studies see we our plan of studying the
agriculture of texas was first a general study of
the whole state and we drove 5 500 miles within the
state to delineate those areas which i believe
you've asked about and We spent a whole month
making their trips through the state and checking
the delineations and so on. And I believe you
remarked that they were still about the same. Yes,
one of the remarkable things that has occurred to
me as I've looked back at that very classic study
that you and a few of your colleagues made, you were
certainly the prime mover in that study. And what
impresses me is that after all these years,
there's been very little change in the
delineation of those types of farming. Yeah, of
course. We had to begin with Dr. Carter's soil
divisions, and we just refined and added an area
here and there that seems different.
And as they are today, you can look up his reports
and see the difference.
Well, that's of most interest.
Reflecting a little bit on how our profession has
changed in terms of graduate study at the
institution. You first pursued graduate study at
the University of Illinois in the 1920s. Then
later in the 1930s, you did a year of graduate study
at the Giannini Foundation and at the University
of California at Berkeley. I'd be very much
interested in getting your recollections of
those individuals from whom you got classes and
what the graduate study concentrated on at that
time? Well, at Illinois, Professor Hanson, I
don't know if you ever heard of him or not, he died
rather young. He was head of the department.
It was he that really steered me into the economics
of the situation. And then
California HR Polley was head of the HR
department. And that's why I went there to
graduate.
He was a very fine individual.
I got most of my
so-called information from him and his
associates. Who were some of the others? Was
Adams, Professor Adams in farm management? He was
there, but he didn't contribute much. He was kind
of... behind the times. I see.
Several others complained. He used an electric
system and he got very little out of it. But H.R.
Tolley was there too. Yes. And of course he saved
the day and brought us into the so-called
presence. Yes. Presence.
Do you recall some of the others that were there at
any foundation at that time?
I'm trying to think of his name. He was head of the
department at South Dakota when I was there.
Benedict. Yes, Murray Benedict. Now, Murray did
his later work in agricultural policy. I don't
know what he was doing at that time.
I didn't follow him very closely after he got
out there. Polly was a big influence. Yes,
influence in getting you there, and he was the one
who most influenced you while you were there, when
you were thinking. Was there anyone else at
Illinois besides Professor Hanson that you
recall in those early days? No, not that I... No,
I didn't.
Then you were on the faculty at South Dakota State
for two years, and I understand that you were one of
the of T.W. Schultz's earliest professors of
agricultural economics. That's right. He's
probably the most famous of our entire
profession, and you've had an influence very
early in his professional life.
Ted has always given me more credit than I deserve.
Well, I've regarded him as an honest man. But what
was your impression of him when he was an
undergraduate student? Well, he was older than
the average student and an outstanding
individual. But I had a class of about 12 boys at
that time, and they were all young,
bright individuals. I've never had a class like
this. more outstanding than they were. And I wish I
had kept up with them so that I could see what
happened, but I didn't. I live in Chicago, Dakota
right now. But you were able, you think, to sense in
Ted Schultz as a student, somebody who had all the
ingredients of greatness. Yeah, right from the
beginning. Yeah, that's interesting.
Well, we've
talked about some of the early research. You
didn't get heavily into research until you got
down here, I guess. You did some at South Dakota in
those two years, but in farm management, type of
farming studies. Was that where you first began to
work with Buck Elliott? Yeah, he was a friend of
mine. He was at the USDA in Washington, or was he in
Washington? He was in Washington, but you
collaborated with him on research while you were
at South Dakota. Very interesting. He was a fine
individual. He didn't live long
enough. I see. What was it that brought you to
Texas?
Mr.
Gabbard was head of the department here. Yes. And,
uh, Buck Elliott happened to come down here right
at the time, and he was looking for somebody to take
the job of farm management.
And, uh, when Mr. Gabbard mentioned it to him, He
immediately recommended me. Very interesting.
That drastically
altered both your personal and professional
life, didn't it? Oh, yeah. And this is a very
primitive area when I came here. Yes.
We had a hard time finding a place to live and all
that sort of stuff. Well, uh-huh. Was it simply
because the area was growing faster than they had,
they had prepared for, or? Well,
my impression of it was that it hadn't grown fast
enough. The housing was poor and all that. Yes. And
we had much better housing in South Dakota than we
had down here. Yes. I never thought about it. I
never know what Alice really thought about it.
Yes. Did she ever question whether or not you made
the right choice in coming to Texas?
She never questioned anything. I see. Well, one of
the bright spots of Mrs. Hopkin, my life is getting
to know her. We got to know her through your
granddaughters, but she was a remarkable woman.
Well, you landed down here, and as I understand it,
you were very quickly caught up into this research
on type of farming areas. The first thing I did when
I came here. I
see, that was your first assignment.
And
that was your plan to do that for all of the areas of
the state? But it never got completed? What
interrupted that?
Well, I don't think any individual or person had
anything to do with it. I think it was the
circumstances of time. There were too many areas.
Too many areas. Then the Depression. Yeah, the
Depression hit us. Came along with all of those
serious problems.
Are you all, well, how, let me not give the answer to
the question, just pose a question. How did the
Depression hit Texas as compared to, say, other
areas? Was it as hard down here or harder? Do you
have some feeling on that? I think it's a matter of
development. I think...
So
that
the
agriculture was just beginning to unfold and
develop when you really got here in the 20s.
Your research activities at Texas A&M involved
you very heavily in research on the severe
economic depression which agriculture was
undergoing during the 20s and all the 30s, through
that whole New Deal farm adjustment programs,
that were designed, I guess, to help farmers just
survive, wasn't it? Well, I don't know that we
thought of it in those terms, that some of them were
going to survive anyway, anyhow, any way you did
it. There was quite a bit of effort at that
time to get people to think in terms of these areas
and that sort of thing. And the whole institution
was pulled into the Extension Service and the
Experiment Station. Mr. Connor was director of
the Experiment Station and he didn't
He didn't have a whole lot of interest in it, as I saw
it. But I attended all meetings with him. And I
guess he was a spokesman for the Experiment
Station. And the young fellow in the Extension
Service was very much more advanced in his
thinking. Who was this? Do you recall his name?
Bill Morgan. Bill Morgan? Yes, yes. He went to
Colorado. He went to Colorado as president of
Colorado State University, didn't he? Mm-hmm. He
was a really young man. Yes.
I was proud to be associated. Mm-hmm. But as you, as
you, you got caught up into, in this... this
change,
trying to help farmers adjust, and one of the ideas
was to really follow the type of farming that was
applicable to the area they were in. Was that? Yes.
Farmer under certain circumstances. Certain
type of land and all that sort of thing. He tried to
think of his problems as different from the area
next to him. Now, you were kind of the lone social
scientist in that group, weren't you? Well, Bill
Morgan, you said, was the young extension.
Did you have problems with the physical
scientists getting them to see the economic
problems?
Well, I don't remember much about that, but I
thought you meant that we have much trouble with
the extension people and people like that. But
this fellow, Bill Morgan, was a favorite of the
extension director. And that made it easy to... I
see. Well, that's good. Williamson was a That's
when Williamson was Director of the Extension
Service. Mr. Connery was Director of the
Experimental Space. We were all separate at that
time. I think it was 42 when
we crowded into one department. Now, as
you began to address these problems of the
Depression, there were lots of new agencies
emerged.
Oh, the AAA resettlement.
You were quite heavily involved, were you not, you
and some of your colleagues, in this AAA work, as I
understand some of the comments of Professor
Gabbard and and others.
Yes, that's what I understand, but there were some
real problems of working with the government
people and others in really getting the FIPL-A
organized, and then learning how to operate it. Do
you recall some of your experiences associated
with that?
I don't, uh, I think it was, as far as I was
concerned, it was in the 80's, my, this fella,
Morgan, who was in good favor with the extension
director. We, uh, we just went right along. Had no
great difficulty. He
was here
during the 30s then, as a young guy. I guess I got to
meet him just about the time he went to Colorado
State University.
And he was, what, maybe less than 50? Oh, yeah. He
went up there and he was in his 30s. Was he? Mm-hmm.
Right. Because that would be in the late 40s, when
he, or about 47 or 8 when he went up there, I expect,
or 46.
But I have no recollection of the time. Do you want
to go ahead and take the film?
Well, Professor Bonin, we've just been visiting a
little bit about all of your involvement
when the AAA was initiated along with other
programs to help farmers during the Depression.
I'd surely appreciate it all you can recollect
about how this program operated. It began, what,
in 19, about 1933? Now,
how was the university or the experiment station
involved? It was really the experiment station,
not the university, wasn't it? Well, the
experiment station, see, at that time it was a
separate organization. And the two of them were
both involved in this operation.
Who ran that program? Do you recall? Did the
statewide operation run out of Bryan College
Station? I don't remember. Washington
background. Yes. And
the two directors were brought in together. And we
had to get along all right that way. I don't
remember we had any great difficulty. There may
have been some, but I didn't know any about it. Yes.
Do you recall the important... problems that had
to be resolved that called for research skills in
agricultural economics and farm management. We
didn't think of them as being separate problems.
Yes. They were just problems we had to meet at the
time. You just had to solve problems. What were
some of those
problems as you now recall them?
There
were problems of supply control and marketing
privileges, I guess, as I recall. How did they
control the marketing of cotton? Did they destroy
a lot of bales of cotton, or did they simply control
how they marketed it?
I don't recall any actual destruction. Yes. They
simply cut back on acreage. They tried to.
All they ever cut back on was the acreage that
didn't produce much anyway. Yes. That's when they
learned how to do that, I guess. They've been doing
it ever since. Yeah. And it led to... use of more
fertilizer and that sort of thing, so they didn't
gain much. Production didn't cut back very much.
Now, tell us more about your involvement. Why,
what did you have to... You mean the AAA effort?
Yes, in that AAA effort.
In the latter part of paragraph six,
you didn't think of this problem being economic or
whatever it was. I recall
visiting with your son Jim one time about this
period. He was a young man in the home, a young boy
maybe, but he says he recalls You're getting calls
in the middle of the night. What would those calls
be about?
I'd say they had these certificates. One of them
had a certain value. And if they misplaced one of
them, they'd call me. Ask me where it was. Were you
in charge of issuing those certificates?
or who these were issued, I'm sure, by the AAA
committees, I suspect. The AAA. I was caught right
in the middle of it. Well,
was this operated from Texas A&M?
Well, we were involved, but I don't know who had the
final yes or no. Was it located on campus, the
handling of the certificates and all these things
were moved right on campus? Right on the campus. I
see. So the Extension Service particularly and
the Experiment Station were intimately involved
in the operation of that program at that time.
That's right. That's interesting. Do you recall
any kinds of legal problems arose out some of these
controlled efforts? I don't know whether they
were legal or illegal.
We used to be a man here by the name of Weddington.
Yes. He was chief clerk in the Extension Service
and a very influential
individual. And as these problems developed, He
and I became very good friends.
And he was a very upright, very good man.
And he could straighten out things from extension
supports. I see. Every organization ought to have
somebody like that. Somebody like that. So that
would be... He was a big man, a big tall fellow.
Yeah. So,
between him on the one hand and Bill Morgan on the
other, you had a lot of help. That's right. Did you
get to know Sam McMillan in the Extension Service?
Do you recall him? in farm management. He was very
active in the early development of teaching farm
management, and then he went with the Extension
Service for a little while. Then finally with the
Farm Security when they got organized during the
Depression. Uh-huh. Okay.
The name kind of flickers around in my mind,
I
see. In the work that you were doing. Yes.
That's interesting. Well, I suspect we may never
experience again those new experimental days of
the AAA and the Depression. We probably don't have
the, we probably don't, first, we may not have the
serious problem arise again that was then, but
we're probably too constrained by tradition now
to, if we did face those serious problems, to
experiment as you folks experimented.
I hope they don't. We don't have them. Why do you say
that?
Well, I guess two or three o'clock calls in the
morning and that sort of thing wouldn't go so good
now. Yes.
During the 30s, there were many more changes made
in agricultural policy.
federal programs for agriculture than at any
other time in our history, probably. Of course, as
you've mentioned, there was some serious
economic problems emerged all during the 20s.
The kind of research that you were doing, were
you And Mr. Gabbard involved very much in
providing information that was useful to the
policymakers,
administrators who were making and
administering farm policy as those policies
emerged in the 30s. Well, that's what we were
thinking about. Yes. to what extent they
influenced people's thinking,
it would be hard to say. Well, I suspect you're, as
others have told me, you're a very modest man.
Well,
I never had a feeling of
I never had a feeling of control over these things.
Yes, well, I can understand that. Yet the kind of
research that you were doing relating to
identifying the problems associated with farm
management, managing these farms for profit,
likely had a substantial impact on... Well, it may
have had.
We never felt like we controlled very much.
When you would make these studies in CA, Did you
work throughout the year? Would you be out in the
state all during the time? You had a field man out in
there, out in the field. Did you know A.C. McGee?
Yes, I knew A.C. McGee. He was field man for about
five years out on the High Plains. At Lubbock or
operating out of Lubbock? He operated out of
Lubbock.
The High Plains area included... the cotton
producing part of the pipelines. And he lived in
Lubbock and had,
I don't know, maybe 50 farmers that worked with
him. And he visited them regularly. He visited
them regularly and got details of the operation.
Farm costs. Did they sort of keep They kept
records. Kept detailed records for him. They used
a simple form of record book that I designed for the
state of Texas.
That's about all I remember,
but he was a good man on detail. Yes.
We depended on him as our contact. The idea, when we
first made this type of farming study, the idea was
that eventually we would get around to all the
areas, which turned out to be impossible. But we
did get to, I guess, four or five of them.
Plans are always bigger than your output. Well,
that's appropriate, I'm sure. We all have to plan
too big and then strain ourselves to get all of it we
can. During
that particular time, of course, your research
unit was totally separated from the teaching. Did
you ever have any graduate students that worked
for you on their dissertations or their thesis?
No. They didn't? Those were never, never were
related together. That's... That was until 1942.
Yes. What's it mean? Gilchrist became president,
nodded two heads around and brought everything
together. Yes. And I say, knock their heads
around. Yes. Some of them had to be hit a little hard
to do that. You know, I never saw as much difference
in a man who went from in charge of the whole
institution. See, he was the, what do you call him?
Chancellor? The president? Chancellor, I guess.
Chancellor, yeah. He could knock anybody's head
around. Yes. And... Later on, after he retired,
while he was chancellor, I couldn't even give a
word.
But after he retired, I walked a good deal, and he
did too. And I'd run into
him out here in South Kansas or something. And I
couldn't hardly get away from him. And he would
talk to me. That's interesting. Showed what kind
of man he was. Yes. He concentrated on his job.
Well, he was too big. Yes.
Well, how did the problems change for you and in
your research as we moved toward the end of the 30s?
into 1940 and 41, and war preparations came on us in
about 1940 and 41, and then the end of 41 we were in
World War II.
What happened to your programs then? Did this
change your research program very much?
Well, it didn't change our thinking about it. not
the program we had, we still have in mind,
after we had developed these type farming areas,
making individual studies in each area. Of
course, that never happened except in four or five
areas.
But during the war, Was there, were you and the
Extension Service as well as the Experiment
Station